But he's been very active in the kind of political
aspects of these things and so on. And he certainly
ought to have
a talk with you now. Now, when research vessels,
obviously you don't have any when you come here.
What do you do? How do you go about it? What kind do
you try to choose? What do you want your
undergraduates to have? Just tell me about it.
Here, we were influenced a good deal by also local
tradition and so on. And when I arrived here in 51,
the department, primarily under Dr. Barnes's, I
think, impetus, had obtained through sort of
government surplus, a small vessel that had been
originally built by the Bureau of Commercial
Fisheries. She was about 115 feet long, wood hull,
and had been designed not as a fishing vessel, but
essentially as a small kind of passenger and
freight vessel to take care of supplying
fisheries
programs up in Alaska and so on. So she had an
interesting sort of characteristic that she
could, although she was a small vessel, she could
accommodate quite a large number of passengers
and had a large hold, which in effect we were able to
convert to a sort of laboratory. She was not,
didn't have a great deal of deck space and so on. But
this vessel had been procured and it required a
certain amount of conversion as they always do and
also the installation of necessary winches and so
on. We used this what was in a sense a very small type
vessel up until we obtained the the Thompson,
which is one of these Agars, in about 1965 or 66. So
we used Brown Bear for about 15 years, and not only
for local work inside Puget Sound and so on and off
the coast, but we took her out into the North
Pacific. not but she was range limited as well as so
size limited and so it was sort of gulf of alaska and
so on but out along the illusion chain and in 1964
and i'm sorry 19
must be 19 1959, 1960, we actually took her north up
into the Bering Sea and actually into the Arctic.
So we extended, we stretched her capabilities
just about as much as and maybe beyond sort of
reasonable limits. But she proved to be a very kind
of efficient vessel in that she could be operated
with a fairly small crew and so on. And we thought we
got a lot of good work out of her. When she was
replaced by the T.G. Thompson, we were We were
clearly sort of vessel limited, but we ended up
with a real sort of problem here in the fact that we
were really rather reluctant to take on one of
these AGARs, but had been told repeatedly by ONR
and NSF that the vessel would be completely
funded, because It was almost an order of
magnitude jump here in the cost of operations and
so on. And so we finally did. And of course, we no
sooner had delivery of the ship than they said they
couldn't budget it. And the department has really
been fighting ever since to, in a sense, get
adequate vessels, operation support for the
vessels. And one thing we did not get involved in,
and it was done intentionally, and it may be hard to
tell whether we were right or wrong, but we never
got involved in anything like the Indian Ocean
Expedition. or even going back prior to that to the
IGY, of using this as a mechanism, in a sense, to
expand the fleet and so on, which was clearly done,
I think, at some of the institutions. They used
these major national efforts to increase the size
of their fleet. But we've never felt we had quite
the same, or I never felt, maybe I should say, and I
know some of the faculty would agree with me, that
we should try and do the same kind of things as
Scripps and Woods Hole did. But we had our own
destiny to try and work out here, which didn't
necessarily involve these very extensive
sea-going cruises. Did you expect all your
undergraduates to work on the vessel out at sea?
Oh,
I think I would have said yes if you go back to the
early 50s or something, but
we got very much caught up with this, the Sputnik
era here. with increased interest in science and
so on. And certainly the ocean became a very
romantic sort of an area of study. And so our
undergraduate program shot up at a rate that I
don't think we would ever have sort of predicted.
And our undergraduate enrollment in
oceanography was increasing about 25% a year,
which means it doubled every three years. And we
went from one student or something in 1952, and we
were up to, I think, over 800
Well, the early 60s, I guess it was. And, I mean, it
was clearly obvious you couldn't do the kind of
things that we'd originally had in mind, which, as
I think I mentioned earlier, a really sort of
practical preparation of sea work and so forth.
And it got to a point that We couldn't even give
laboratories
with our formal courses because we didn't have the
capacity to handle this number of students. So
even the kind of laboratory work clearly suffered
under this expansion. It was very exciting, but
I think probably went too far. Now, I don't know
what the later, what's happening in the last year
or two, but it's dropped down considerably, the
undergraduate enrollment. But it, in a sense, got
overinflated here, but not really due to our
recruiting efforts or anything, but just because
of general popular interest. And we've done a lot
of things other than just the sort of formal
undergraduate
and graduate training here, in that
it started back in the days where I really felt we
did need to provide some input of students and so
on, which involved working with high school
teachers and so on. I ran summer institutes for for
high school teachers for a number of years here
with the idea that, you know, they'd encourage
some of their students to come into the field. I've
been involved in the writing of two high
school-level textbooks, and so we did that. And
one of the things which had started before the war
And it was a general sort of introductory
oceanography course, which still carries the
number of Oceanography 101, which was in no way
intended for our own majors, but a science
orientation course. And most of the students who
take it are not even science students, but
humanities and social science students. We were
teaching. That's a five-credit course. And a few
years ago, at least, we were teaching that to over
1,500 students a year. So we build up, certainly. I
must have some sort of general public awareness of
the field, at least. And I think these are
worthwhile things, not just sort of promotional.
But anybody living around here, I think, ought to
know a little bit about what the ocean is like.
So that's still going on. When you started to
outfit these early vessels, did you have a
professional captain do something? Something
like James Fawn, I'm thinking of. Or did you try to
do it within your department? No, we started out in
a sort of small way here, and the first man we had who
was skipper of, he'd been a skipper of an even
smaller vessel before the Brown Bear, had no sort
of formal training as an officer. He had been a
fisherman primarily, and a small boat operator
type person, and came in and kind of learned the job
as he went along. He was a marvelous individual,
and Frank Princehouse, and
very much interested in the in the what we were
trying to do and extremely cooperative and very
good at taking care of the vessel and the crew and so
on we actually had to see that he got the
opportunity to get some sort of special training
and so on when the thompson came along because
otherwise he couldn't have been captain on the
thompson unfortunately he uh shortly after we got
the thompson he developed a serious ailment and
and since died but uh he was captain on her for about
a year or so and then we went to these morris out of
professionally trained uh officers and uh i think
the man that's captain now is uh the thompson that
came to us from scripps having been on one of their
their ships so there's been a switch there but it's
partly Related, again, just to the size of the
vessels and the kind of Coast Guard regulations
about the types of officers that you have to have on
board.
When you first come to Washington, the funding for
oceanography and oceanographic departments was
sort of a block funding. That is, that... When I
came out here. When you came out here, right. Yes.
Is that ONR and so forth would get sort of a block
funding to a university, which has moved...
recently to sort of special project fundings.
What sort of feeling do you have about that as it
affects the way you try to work your department?
Well, of course, I've been out of this for about 10
years. But I just think it's been a very
unfortunate sort of trend. And I keep hoping I can
see some sign that's going to reverse itself. But I
don't think I have been able to see anything so far.
that, yes, although in a sense, in terms of the
total dollars, they were small now compared to
what's being transferred
these days. Nevertheless, they were relatively
large amounts. And in the first few years, when
essentially all our support came from ONR, it
almost used to be done by letter. they'd send us a
letter saying, what do you want to do? And we'd
write a letter back saying, we think it'd be fun to
do so. And they'd say, well, we think we can give you
X thousand dollars next year, and why don't you
write a request for that? And we'd write another
letter saying, we'd like to have so much for next
year, and that was it. But since then, it has gone
progressively towards more agencies involved,
which in a way, is life insurance, I think, from our
point of view, because not all of them go up and down
at the same time. So it gives you some sort of
security in that way. But the fact that the
projects have been split down and down and down and
down until you get the situation, which I feel
prevails today where money is not allocated
really to, although legally it comes to the
university and to the department, it's based on
these individual sort of proposals. And what
people do is start talking about my money and my
ship time and so forth. And so that it I think that
from an administrative point of view, it's
essentially an intolerable situation and that
the chairman of the department has no way of
administering. All he's doing is trying to fit
together all these little bits and pieces, and he
has no way of fitting things together in most
cases. and saying, OK, you two fellows get
together, use the ship jointly or something. They
both say, well, I got my money to do so and so on. And
it's completely sort of ridiculous. I think it's a
part of sort of Parkinson's law here that this is
the way in which a bureaucracy functions. It tends
to generate work for itself. And this is exactly
what I can see is happening in Washington. If you
can have 100 projects under your guidance rather
than 10, you've got that much more paper and you
justify that many more positions and so on. But
this plus the fact that there are many, many more
sort of bookkeeping requirements these days than
there used to be, it really makes it a... major sort
of problem, I think, from the administrative
point of view, to do these things. The problem, I
think, is sort of being compounded recently by the
fact that we've got into this
multi-institutional
pattern here. I haven't had any direct part of any
of these things, but I don't know how they managed
to do those things and keep them going. But even the
Sea Grant program was originally thought of as a
sort of block funding type thing. And even there,
without any kind of appropriate authorization
from Congress or anything, they went off in the
same direction breaking things down into
ridiculously small things. And there's all the
paperwork involved with this, as well as the lack
of flexibility. The other thing that's been
happening here is the fact that you're committed
to making plans longer and longer in advance, that
you want any kind of major support these days.
You've probably got a plan about three years ahead
and hard to get it. The result is, by the time this
third year's rolled around, you have absolutely
no flexibility. If things have changed or
something, you're kind of stuck with things. So
the planning's fine, but it certainly, you lose
any kind of choice in things.
A lot of the problems that have come from the
combination of inflation and reduced funding and
so on, all have really been most critical since I
stepped aside as chairman of the department. And I
thought I was leaving everything and looked rosy
at the time that I decided that I would step down as
chairman. And in a sense, I probably couldn't have
chosen a better time. But I certainly had no
anticipation of what was going to happen. What
about the division of agencies, which you
mentioned earlier? Let me sketch something for
you. ONR becomes more mission-oriented as it
advances upward after World War II, let's say
particularly after 1949. And you begin to have the
rise of NSF and other scientific agencies to
administer oceanography. Was this essentially a
good thing? Well, the...
I think it was for probably many different sort of
reasons. But ONR was obviously strictly a Navy
type thing, although in the early days they
certainly interpreted their responsibilities
very broadly, I think, relatively speaking. But
there were areas that they were sort of not
touching at all. But essentially, at least my
interpretation is that sort of out of the ONR model
came this idea for NSF. And NSF was set up, as I
recall, in 1951. Let's see, the first director was
moved over from ONR. Remember, wasn't it? Yeah.
Waterman.
so on. But the general situation was that ONR would
continue to support oceanography. NSF would get
into, essentially, other fields. And NSF really
didn't get into oceanography to any, I think I'm
right in saying, any kind of significant extent
until the IGYK program came along, which was
actually in what was it, 57, 58, but where the
funding must have predated that by a year or so. And
I think NSF picked that up because, well, it was not
just oceanography, there were many other
aspects, but it would not have been appropriate
for ONR to have gone into all of these other fields
besides oceanography, certainly some of them. so
this is really what moved nsf into the into the
picture and they've essentially never been out of
it since and it's the the sort of drift of things has
been such that we've been told various times well
nsf is going to pick up more and more of this and I
don't know quite what has happened. ONR seemed to
be sort of going down in level of support as far as
they were concerned here, but now I hear that maybe
they're coming up again and so on. What has been
difficult is for us, and we're not alone in this, is
to how do you sort of deal with ONR, NSF, AEC, which
no longer exists under that name, but how do you
keep some sort of a balance or whatever with these
different agencies? And very often I feel that we
have been in a position of kind of divide and
conquer, that where all the money and so forth
existed in Washington, they were the ones who got
together and decided, well, we'll support this
institution to such and such a level. We're put in
the position of asking people for in a sense
overlapping kind of support i don't think this is
actually done but i mean you know you never know
quite what's going to come out of these things so i
think it's been a kind of a scary game here and and uh
aec turned out to be a fairly substantial
supporter for our work here and entirely on sort of
environmental studies although they were
related to to essentially radioactive materials
that might get into the Columbia River and so on. So
that was a concern to them, but they were a kind of
major supporter here. It seems almost to an
outsider that it's as if oceanographers looked at
what the government wanted and planned a research
topic they might get funded rather than moving out
and directing research to what interested them.
Is that a fact? I think so, and of course there's
always the
kind of argument here about freedom of research
and so forth, and I think all of the agencies have
made quite a conscious effort to play fair on this
thing, but the fact is that they do influence you a
good deal, not by telling you what to do, but by
refusing to support things that they didn't want
to do. So things do become very much controlled in
this way, and exceedingly difficult to get sort of
new things started, and particularly to get sort
of younger men started and so on here.
So I think it reached a point where there was a sort
of undesirable
amount of control over what goes on. Sure, you do
things where the money is. Now, we've chosen in a
few cases not to go where the money was. We didn't
participate at all in this Indian Ocean
expedition. by choice. We were asked at one time if
we wanted to get involved in a lot of the Antarctic
operations, and we said, no, thank you. We didn't
want to. We, I guess, here have operated a little
bit more on a sort of an individual basis, and have
not participated maybe as much in some of these of
multi-institutional programs that have been
coming along here in recent years. Some of the
individuals have. They've participated and gone
on and so on. Now, we did get quite involved here for
several years as part of the international,
what's it called, international biological
program on this upwelling program. But we've more
or less operated
more by ourselves, in a way. Is this because of the
undergraduate emphasis here? No, I don't think
one could say that. Although
the good many that they of the faculty are involved
in teaching, either at the undergraduate or
graduate level, which means that they're not
entirely free to go off for long periods without
making appropriate sort of adjustments and
reallocations.
No, I think it's more sort of individual choices. I
may be overemphasizing this in a way,
One
thing that I sort of fought against for a number of
years was getting involved in
this
general sort of marine geophysics, this
refraction and reflection, seismic shooting and
so on, which involved carrying explosives and
was, in a sense, a kind of hazardous thing. And I
said, I didn't think we ought to get into that.
There were two or three institutions that were
heavily involved in it. Why did we have to get into
it? Well, lo and behold, some money came along, and
we were doing it. And we no sooner got started on it
than ONR cut off the support. So we were probably
being well advised never to get really sort of
committed to that thing. And I think there have
been probably some similar sort of things. I
think if one took a really sort of objective view of
things, one would find that The programs in this
country are pretty much sort of what the federal
government agencies want them to be. There's very
little sort of independence here now. They can
always turn around and say that anybody who wants
to can submit a proposal on anything they think
they want to do, and that if something isn't going
on, it's because nobody's interested in doing the
work. So they're kind of stuck on this. I, just as
for fun here several years ago, I dreamed up a
rhetorical question. I asked Professor Rattray
whether I could have the Thompson for a couple of
weeks. And he said, what do you want the Thompson
for? And I said, oh, I'm not going to tell you, but
I've got an idea that I want to test. Can I have the
ship for a couple of weeks? And he thought for a
while, and he said, well, he guessed I could. It
would require some telephoning to Washington to
get some funds reallocated and so on. But if I
really had a good thing, I could probably get the
ship. And I said, what about some people to help me?
And he said, oh, no, no people. Everybody's
committed, you see, to other programs. So I had,
this was just, hypothetical question, but it
indicates how tied up you are with the system in a
way. We had a, we've mentioned it at lunchtime
here, we had this drought situation this year, and
it was more than just a local drought. Something
very unusual has been